So we were down there re-equipping ourselves and
getting ourselves sorted out, and you don't do
that overnight. We had to get new replacements in,
and remember you've got to check them out and fit
them into the crews, and some of them may be trained
for artillery, but you're going to use them for
tank gunners, and my God, you have to do that in a
hurry, and you never get trained people. to fit
every slot where you've had casualties, so you've
got to keep training even during battle. And we got
through Thanksgiving all right, and we're still
working to put this stuff together when
the Ardennes campaign broke out on the 16th of
December.
A fellow named Hugh O'Farrell, who had the 2nd
Battalion of the 66th Regiment.
I had the 2nd Battalion of the 67th Regiment.
We were ordered out at midnight on the 16th
to get in the Ardennes Campaign. We went on two
different columns.
We traveled blacked out all night long
over the icy roads, mud, ice, some rain,
fog.
Blacked out all night long. Show you the
discipline we had in those units. We never lost a
vehicle. I never lost a vehicle. I don't think Hugh
lost any. And we're talking about moving hundreds
of vehicles,
armored vehicles, fighting units. Daylight
came. We
were on the right road. We hadn't lost any
vehicles. And we continued to move.
And we got into a place called Sine,
Belgium.
I recall we coiled up about two o'clock in the
afternoon.
And the division commander had sent word out that
the corps commander wanted us to be in Army
Reserve.
And this didn't suit the division commander at
all, a guy named Ernie Harmon.
What does it mean to be in Army Reserve? That means
you move down here now, you don't do any fighting
until I tell you to. Okay. Meantime, the division
had reconnaissance. The reconnaissance
battalion had gone out screening all the roads in
the area in which the division was going to occupy,
which was on the main axis of the Germans to
Antwerp. So we just go grab off that. What the
theater commander and the corps commander are
saying is, we've got that armored division to
stride their avenue into Antwerp where they're
going, So we know they ain't gonna get there unless
they knock that armored division out and ain't
anybody about to do that. That old armored
division's got too damn much experience and too
much power.
So it
was
four or five o'clock. Things began to get a little
hazy, you know.
Coming to the road, and this main road, Hugh
O'Farrell's on one side of it, I'm on the other
side, Bill Whack on the other side. In other words,
we got this major avenue closed, or blocked. Here
came a sergeant up the road with his, from our
reconnaissance outpost,
with his dead platoon leader laying across the
jeep. in front of the jeep and another wounded man.
And, well, what hit you?
Said, a German column moving up this road.
Said, they knocked out our M8 armored car and they
captured and killed the rest of them. This is all I
could get out.
So the story goes that General Harmon contacted
the Corps commander and said, here is what's
happened. He said, it's obvious to me that this
outfit is moving.
And said, by God, I want orders to attack. Collins
said, you're in Army Reserve and you will continue
to remain in Army reserve and I'll give you orders
when you are to attack. Is this Jay Lawton? Yeah,
Jay Lawton.
Harmon said a four-letter word
and then called
the two combat commanders Pee Wee Collier had CCA,
he was a brigadier responsible for Hugh
O'Farrell, and I.D. White, who had CCB, who was our
brigadier on my side to combat Command B, ordered
us into action. Over Collins Head? Yeah, over
Collins Head. Told him to go. You know, F himself.
to be attacking anyway. He's going to save you a
soldier, absolutely.
Well, within the hour,
these two leading battalions that led the
division down there. So you took your troops? We
deployed them. Both of them deployed them on each
flank of that road. Within an hour, here they came,
bumper to bumper, just about dark. Bumper to
bumper. Tanks, about 800 and some odd tanks and
armored vehicles and thousands of men. Second SS
Panzer Division. A whole division? A whole
division. And what did you have? How many tanks did
both of you have? I had 56 and you had 56.
What happened? We destroyed every damn one of
them. Tore them all to hell. killed thousands of
people, their soldiers, and stopped the advance
of the Ardennes campaign. How? By destruction of
that division. I know. How did you destroy the
division? With fire, with tank fire and artillery
fire and rifle fire. So you surprised them moving
on? We not only surprised them, but we had the
stealth there to kill them with. Well, once you
started shooting, didn't their tanks start
spreading out? Absolutely. They couldn't spread
out. They were bumper to bumper on this road. And
you had them boxed in on both sides? We had them
boxed in on both sides. We killed the lead tank and
the rear tanks and the vehicles and then just
started wading into them. Well, couldn't the
tanks get off the road? Nope. They didn't get off
the road. They all burned. We didn't wait—well, a
few of them didn't burn, I guess, but most of them
did. We'd done this before. This is the third time.
So you had them sandwiched in. In other words, you
had the front and both of the flanks— They were just
like this. Here is a road here coming out of the
Ardennes campaign. I mean, coming out of
Ardennes. Some wooded area, lightly wooded area.
I'm on this side here. Hugh O'Farrell is over here.
Those represent a tank company, and this
represents from here to here about 1,000 meters.
And here we are, and they've got these vehicles,
one right after the other, real close. They're
moving. They're moving real close. I mean, 10
meters between vehicles. And sometimes less than
that. And people on them and riding in them and so on
and so forth. I'm sure we let some get away. But we
just slapped this one out up here. And he started
hitting in here. And nobody makes a move. They try
to move off. Really, you're killing them. You've
got 56 tanks just searching. And 56 on this side are
just busting the hell out of them. Plus the
artillery pounding them.
So it's like a canyon. Yeah, and we did the same
thing. In which you had control of both sides, and
you hit the first and you hit the last tanks, and
they couldn't get out of there. That's right. What
are they going to maneuver against? Against you?
Direct fire into them? Mm-hmm. You see?
We're about 300 to 400 meters off out here. Oh,
that's all you were on both sides? That's all. 300
to 400 meters, yeah. My goodness. We just sucked
them in there and killed them. We did that during
the, first time we did that was in St. Louis. Oh God,
the soldiers had a time down there in St. Louis.
Shot up the finance, division headquarters of the
finance section and killed a general. I reported
it. And General Brooks was commanding the
division and General White was a brigadier and
they wanted to get down there and see this, dead
general. By the time we got down there, this guy was
naked because the soldiers had pulled all his
beautiful uniform off, you know. What are you
gonna say? So they give me hell. But this
headquarter, they had a finance truck in there
that got blown up also, and
I think somebody said five or six million dollars
worth of French francs in there. Come to find out
that That stuff was for real. Soldiers were
throwing that stuff around all over the place.
Everybody was saying it was no damn good. Come to
find out later, you're about six million dollars
worth of gold-certified French francs. Well,
getting back to this and the Ardennes, when you
reported what happened,
what did General Collins have to say? Well, there
wasn't much he could say. We just destroyed the
division.
I guess after the Ardains campaign was over,
General Harmon went home.
So they relieved him? He didn't go home. He was
promoted to take a corps, a corps headquarters,
but he was never given a third star. So, although he
was a thousand percent right, he won the battle,
but lost the war. You know how that goes. Because he
defied Collin's order, but
that's where the guy on the ground that knows
what's going on, you better listen to him.
Wouldn't it have been a shame if we'd have sat there
with that division and allowed these people to
come up here and deploy and cut us up? How do you
answer that one? You don't. Well, what did you
think of Collins? I thought he was a weak sister. I
thought he was similar to some of the other senior
people we had. They were nice guys.
but not cut out to really
fight a war. And I'm sure that General Collins did
thousands of things right,
but this was a hell of a mistake.
that he didn't want to accept the division
commander's judgment of what the hell was going
on. So, since I was a part of this, you have personal
feelings
against the guy who, if his orders had not been
countermanded by the division commander, I might
not be sitting here. So you get a personal feel on
this thing, which may be good and it may be wrong.
Did you take any prisoners? I think there were a
few.
I think there were a few. Did you lose any tanks? We
never lost a man, never had a scratch.
I can give you example after example of that in
Vietnam. We're going to get to Vietnam later.
Where firepower saves people's lives.
Let's go back now to discuss, well we just finished
the Ardennes and let's continue on that campaign.
During the Ardennes campaign,
I was wounded again, I guess for the second or third
time. I was evacuated back to England. What kind of
wound was it? It came from German artillery. I had
my head outside the tank trying to see and try to
move through the woods. And wooded areas are not
very conducive for tank operations, but if that's
what you got, that's what you use. And
the German artillery breaking in the trees with
tree bursts, they cut this finger off and cut it
down. So they were shooting above you with
fragment shells and spraying you. You see, it was
point detonating fuse and it would be hitting in
the trees and going off in the trees and the
fragments were coming down. So, your hand and
glove was laying outside the turret, you know, and
you're trying to move along and conduct a battle
and it cut this thumb and finger off. It's got some
use left in it, but anyway,
About that time my
gunner took a piece inside the head and killed him
and I went down then. The loader went over to become
the gunner and I dropped down in the tank to load the
gun and a round came in and kind of anti-godling, 75
millimeter round, came in the tank and bounced
around in a turret and pinned this arm against the
wall. And I had on a heavy leather flying jacket,
wool lined, or this arm would have been totally
knocked off. And that anti-tank projectile,
tungsten steel that they were shooting
broadsided against it after it had been around,
lost most of its velocity, but pinned it against
the turret and dropped down. So I just totally lost
all this, you see. From your elbow down, you had no
feeling whatsoever. Yeah, not at all. And this was
cut open, and thank God it was cold, you know, and
the blood had been coagulating in my leather
glove, which had a liner in it. And this anti-tank
shell went right through them? Came through off of
the angle. Right through, right into the tank?
Right into the tank, yeah. And, uh, So I would find—
No one was killed? Only my gunner who was killed
from the— Shrapnel. Not shrapnel, shell
fragment. Shrapnel, you know, is a ball. Right,
right, okay. Okay, so don't you consider yourself
and your crew pretty lucky that the shell could
purse right into your tank and not kill anyone?
Yeah, it came in behind the driver. and it was kind
of low, and they came in, and they come up, and they,
my gunner was already dead, and he had slumped
over, and we were trying to continue the battle
here because we were receiving a lot of pressure,
and as long as we shoot, it was all right. It hadn't,
a shell fragment hadn't hurt the tank, and he was
still in good
loading the damn thing, and the loader moved over
to be the gunner. And the Germans were up in front of
you on the road? Oh, yeah. They were anti-tank
guns. Yeah. And you were on the lead. 75mm, yeah.
And so you were the first one to get hit? I was the
first one to get hit. And so what'd you do then?
Well, people moved up. How'd you maneuver the tank
down? I was still on the radio and people moved up. A
guy named Jim Starr, who had my F company, I told
him, I said, Jim, move up on the left here and get
through these woods as best you can. Get up here and
get on the left here and take this damn fire off of
us. I said, I've been hit and you're going to have to
take command. He said, Roger that, I understand.
So he started moving. bypass my dead tank, of
course, you see. I was dead in the water. The tank
was finished. So,
the driver
was able to get out and get the dead sergeant out and
with a loader help get me out and tank for some
reason didn't blow up until we were a hundred yards
away from it. I don't know what happened. I don't
know whether they shot it and hit it again or what
happened, but we were getting away from it because
you never know when a fire is gonna start. So you
were moving back up the road? They were out. We
were, they were carrying the dead soldier and I was
making it on my own. So Jim Starr was in charge. He
assumed command. And so did Starr and the rest of
the tanks, did they knock out these? Went ahead and
cleaned them out. Outflanked them then?
Outflanked them, come in on the flank of them,
killed them, and I just stopped them. And I was
evacuated to Paris and then to England. And I was
gone about
three or four weeks total time. Came back,
Ardennes campaign, I was hit on, I
believe it was the first or second of January, and
the campaign was over on about the 13th. Second
Army Division moved up north of Hawkin,
and I stole away from the hospital. I went AWOL from
the hospital and went to England. I went to
Heathrow, caught an airplane to Orly Field in
France, hitchhiked into Paris,
went to the rear area transportation and asked for
transportation to go back up to the front. Ended up
by riding with a black sergeant who was leading a
red ball truck company up that night. We left at
midnight. We spent all night and got into the edge.
When I got into the edge, I got the field telephone
of one of the units there, one of the supply units.
And I called on the line at division rear
headquarters. I got the headquarters. My
battalion sent a jeep for me and picked me up in
Liege and I was back in my outfit in command. Why'd
you go AWOL? Why didn't you wait until you got
orders? I was afraid I might lose my unit, you know,
if you'd gone very long. You're gone more than 30
days until I would get another guy to command your
unit. What were you gone? Three weeks? I'd gone
about three weeks. Did the doctors want to keep you
there? They wanted me to keep me on. As a matter of
fact, they threatened to send me to the United
States, and I didn't want any part of that. So I— How
was your arm by that time? Well, I was doing—this is
still, you know, it's just dead out there. It's
just there, but it's better than nothing. Good
thought. Yeah, and it hadn't healed up, of course.
But it was coming along, no infection. It moved the
stitches out of it. And how was the rest of your arm?
Well, this was still black, and they were having me
put it in. They were working it every day, a
physiotherapist. It got to where it didn't hurt me
any, but you know, it's still black from where it
got squashed. So I decided that I could make it, and
I just got out of there. Did you think about your
career at that time? Yeah, that's what I was
thinking about. I didn't want to lose my command. I
didn't want to lose my unit and the war wasn't over.
But going AWOL, that certainly might not help your
career in the long run. Well, that's true, but I
just had to take a chance on that. I just had to take a
chance on that. And you were just eager to get back
in the combat? I wanted to get back in my unit. In
your command. In my command, so... I never thought
much about my career then. I was just thinking
about my unit and trying to stay alive, you know.
And so when you got back, what did your commanding
officer have to say? Oh, my God, he was happy as
hell. Oh, he was? Yeah.
Did you tell him that you went over the hill? I told
him that I'd had transportation between London
and Paris were such, and the hospital, that I
didn't have time to check out. So if there's any
complaints, it's because I just didn't have time
to really go through all the procedure of checking
out. You've got to understand what you did.
Well, did you ever, never heard a word? Never heard
a word from it.
So what, did your commanding officer cover for you
then? Nothing ever come up. I guess that... The
doctors never did anything? Never did a thing, no,
no. I don't think they really cared, you know. The
guy would get up and leave. They don't know where in
the hell he goes. Soldiers do the same thing. There
were soldiers noted for running off from the
hospital and getting back to his unit. He doesn't
want to go join anybody else's unit. He doesn't
want to get in that replacement system, you know.
So he'll find out that he's gonna be assigned to
what he called a REPL depot, replacement depot,
you see, where you're a number and you're just
gonna go here or wherever they need you most. Well,
you just leave the damn hospital and go AWOL and go
back to your unit. When you tell them that, just
tell them that you're alright and you want to get
back to your unit. You don't want to go to somebody
else's unit. How had your command done while you
were away? They had done well. Jim Starr had, from
Gainesville, Texas up here, he had He had taken
over command of the battalion, he was a captain,
taken over command of the battalion and finished
off the campaign and then moved the unit up there
and they were getting ready to go again and I walked
in there a couple of days before. He stepped back
down to his company and took it over and off we went.
We headed out then to the Rhine, I guess.
And I took a town named Krefeld, K-R-E-F-E-L-D,
Krefeld on the Rhine.
And
that was the industrial center in the industrial
area. Germans mostly, most all of them except some
remnants, had pulled back across the Rhine and
blown most of the bridges. I had tried to get this
bridge at Krefeld, but they had blown that thing a
few hours before I got there.
We found out later that there was a failure on the
Germans' part down south where the 9th Armored
Division crossed.
I believe that's what it was. But we pulled up
against the Rhine and first thing you know we get
orders to cross at Wessel, W-E-S-S-E-L, and they
had an airborne drop over there,
about a regimental strength airborne drop over
there. on the other side while we were bridging it.
We bridged, the 2nd Armored bridged to Ryan the
vessel in eight hours and 20 minutes. Eight hours
and 20 minutes at dark, after dark. That's 17th
Combat Engineers of the 2nd Armored Division.
Eight hours and 20 minutes. And I crossed them. And
I was the lead element, advance guard for the
division. And I headed for Liebstadt and
Paderborn,
and the 3rd Armored Division crossed down at
Cologne.
And that division was commanded by Maurice Rose.
He was killed. Mike Gilman, who was there. Their
advance guard leader was killed.
I never lost a soldier on the north flank in my unit.
I fought like hell.
Mike Yeoman
is a brother of the football coach at the
University of Houston.
I can't think of a yeoman down there's name, first
name now. I can't think, it doesn't matter. But we
finished off after five days and five hard nights
of, we met at Paderborn, linked up. That's the
heart of Germany, that's still the heart of
Germany. Whoever takes that has Germany.
I was going to, I had a great disappointment. I was
going to, I promised the soldiers, I said, we get
this link up here, we closed off some fourteen
divisions,
and the whole heart of Germany. Great double
envelopment, historical double envelopment. as
it was a historical meeting engagement back on the
16th of November.
I had promised my soldiers that they'd get a chance
to get some rest and we'd get all of our vehicles
refueled and maintenance up on them and ammo and
all that. All of that was underway. We had coiled up
in a big area. big wagon train area, tank
battalion, tank battalion, tank battalion,
infantry battalion with each tank battalion,
artillery in the middle ready to shoot in any
direction, scout reconnaissance out all the way
around. We brought in fuel and ammunition and some
food and water and that sort of thing. The mail,
which they hadn't seen. And we were gonna get all
that maintenance done and then we were gonna good
night's rest for the first time. We met those
people about two o'clock in the evening and we were
about finished about five o'clock and it's
beginning to get gray and dusk and soldiers were
thinking about going to sleep when here comes the
division commander. Who was he? General, now
General I.D. White. a retired four-star general
now, Norwich graduate, Norwich.
So. Was he a one-star general then? Two. He'd just
been promoted to two-star. Ernie Harmon left
after the Ardange campaign and he took over the
division and got promoted.
What did General White have to say? General White
said, you've got your map? Yes, sir. He said, we're
right here. I said, that's right, sir. He said,
well, I want you to move
from this point up here. I
said, hell, that's 12 kilometers up there. That's
right. Well, he said, I want you to jump off here at
midnight,
and the division is going to follow you by six
hours. And I want you to get a pass through the
Teutoburger Wall at a town named Dentmole, and
that's a SS collecting point where all the
soldiers, SS soldiers that get, units get beat up
and so on and forth, they all
They were reorganized into other units. He said, I
want you to take that pass and that mall and have
that all cleared out because the whole division is
going to follow you
by six hours. You're going to jump off at midnight,
and we're going to start moving at six.
Goddamn. I said, my soldiers haven't had any rest
or anything.
He said, say again, once you're here at midnight,
the division's going to follow you by six hours.
And I said, roger that. So I called Lieutenant
Drake, who had the reconnaissance company that
was attached to me. I said, Drake, five o'clock.
here at midnight. I get some scouts quick on the
goddamn road and understand that this is an
uncleared area. Uncleared. So the enemy could be
right there? The enemy could be all over it, you
understand that? He said, Roger, sir, and I said
report to me every 30 minutes by radio. Roger that.
He said, I'll send Sergeant Happy. Sergeant Happy
got killed the next day. No, two days later, but he
said, okay. Sergeant Happy was replacing a
lieutenant because he didn't have enough
lieutenants in reconnaissance, so he took a
reconnaissance platoon. Sergeant Happy took off
and he reported, and Break, Lieutenant Break, a
company commander, was following back behind,
moving along, posting some guides. very helpful
that night. If you got to be at some place at some
specific point at that time, you got to know where
you're going. Well, everything worked well, and I
got on that damn thing, and I figured we were going
to have to move about 10 o'clock, and I didn't want
to stop, but by the time we got the orders out, and
everybody zeroed in, and so on and forth, it was, we
didn't have any spare time, so we started moving
in, and got up here a few minutes ahead of time, and I
just proceeded to continue to move. We ran into
Army headquarters during the night. German?
Germans. We caught German tank crews with tanks
guarding the road that we were on asleep. They were
exhausted too. Yeah, and we used the old piano wire
method, you know. Do you know what I'm talking
about? Take a piece of piano wire about three feet
long. You put a hand grenade ring on each end of it
that fits in your finger. A hand grenade ring, you
know, it pulls the piano out of your hand and it's
very strong. And so, you catch a guard out there
halfway asleep or something, or asleep on the
ground, you just put that piano wire over there and
cross it and pull it up on his neck, you know, and you
can kill him without him ever making a squawk. and
that's what you have to do. So we did the lead
elements. I was with the lead recon platoon all
night, everybody moving along. Ran into this
headquarters. I called back on the radio to my rear
area. So you were in the lead? I was up front. You
were in the lead jeep then, or you were in the lead
tank? I was in the lead jeep behind the recon
platoon. Okay, and the recon platoon, what did
they have? Jeeps. Yeah, jeeps, that's all. All
jeeps, yeah. And you guys were driving up and
catching these guys asleep? At night. Or were you
walking up? At night. They were so tired that they
didn't even hear you driving up? No. You know, a
jeep's fairly quiet. We come into an area that you
just, obviously, you know, there's some activity
here. You can see some lights flickering over
there. That's not German houses because the
Germans would shoot them, you know. That's the
military. So we ran into this one army
headquarters and it was about 300 yards off the
road. The tank crews on guard there were asleep. We
knocked them off. Would you have 50 calibers on the
Jeep? 50 calibers. 50 calibers or 30 calibers.
Usually a 30 caliber is mounted down there, but
sometimes you have a pedestal mount with a 50
caliber up there because it gives you some pretty
heavy stuff. And we use armor-piercing rounds in
it too to clean up thin-skinned vehicles and
stuff. Anyway, this is obviously the big
headquarters. They had generators running, you
know, and lights and tents, and you could see them
flickering in and out and so on and forth. And I
called back and said, at this point, you're going
to find a tank there, but don't worry about it.
The crew is dead, and it's right opposite an Army
headquarters here, or headquarters of that
magnitude, because it had about We were able to
identify there about 10 or 15 big Buick sedans,
Mercedes and Buick sedans, so that's typical.
A little parcel of land I paid $900 an acre for and
selling it for $2,500. Really? Where's that? Down
in the old country in Kerr County, north of San
Antonio. Gee, that's too bad. Well, I'll tell you
what.
Ms. H., since I had this cancer, she's a little
upset about us having properties in Montana and
South Carolina.
You were discussing moving in. to the German
headquarters and you were radioing back. Yeah,
well during that night
we ran through all types of different
installations. And you got to this German
headquarters and now you were radioing back.
Yeah, I was radioing back telling them you had to
keep everybody advised and up to date because you
didn't want some tank driver coming along there
that might be inclined to be frightened and see
this German tank there and start shooting and
create a disturbance in your rear area or the
middle of your element when you're using as much
stealth as possible during the night and being as
careful as you can because you The one thing that
worries you most, I think, during the night,
movement and fighting during the night, is that
you keep track of where you are because you don't
want to be on the wrong road the next day when a
division is following you and you've cleared one
road, but it just so happened that you were on the
wrong road and they're going on another road that
hasn't been cleared. So that's disaster. So
that's what I think you worry about most of during
the night. But anyway, I had a funny thing happen
there. I called my headquarters commandant in the
rear of my column, and I said, when you pass this
particular area here, I said, I'd like for you to,
since you're at the rear of the column, the combat
elements, I said, I'd like for you to shoot up these
damn Buick sedans in this Army headquarters over
here. Did you already capture the headquarters? I
had already captured it, but I said that. And who
was in there? Were there some officers? Well, they
were running. Oh, hell, they were running off.
Most of them run off on us. We didn't get a handful of
them. We got a few soldiers. But you drove in there
in your Jeeps. Well, reconnaissance elements
went in. And you tried to surprise them? Hell, they
were running out all through the dark on us every
place. And so I just called a guy, a captain back
there at my headquarters, a commandant, and I
said, when you get up here, blow this stuff up. I
said, there's 15 or 20 Mercedes Buick sedans up
here. High officers ran off and left them, and
they're in the woods out here somewhere. I don't
know where they are, so you may have a fight when
daylight comes, but when you come along here,
shoot them up.
About that time, on the radio, it said, Python
White 6, this is Pyramid 6.
I said, Roger. He said, disregard your last
instructions. Disregard. He said, I've been
looking for a Buick sedan for three years. I said, I
called my commandant and I said, disregard my last
transmission.
Old Captain come back and said, Roger, sir, we are
in receipt of message.
Goddamn, they did. They drove around, you know,
they got them some staff cars. 1940 Buicks, I think
they were, Mercedes. Well, a very interesting
thing, we proceeded on during the night and we got